[MUSIC PLAYING]
NARRATOR: Some places
have a feeling about them,
a sense in the air, something
that reaches out and grabs you.
From ancient sacred
sites to haunted houses,
these are significant
places, sometimes lost
in the mists of time.
Mysterious treasures
waiting to be rediscovered.
Places where ancients
gather, where worlds collide,
and ley lines are the signs
that lead us to the other side.
JERRY MEINTJIES:
Oh, a lot of people
died at that time,
a lot of people.
But everywhere, you
can feel it everywhere.
Now, Matjiesfontein, but for
all these years, all of us
know if you walk, you can feel.
There is someone next to
you or at the back of you.
You can feel that feeling.
You are not alone.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
My name is Jerry Meintjies.
I am coming from Laingsburg.
I work for the last 21 and a 1/2
years at Matjiesfontein Hotel.
I changed to day shift,
because I see a lot of things
happen during night shift.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
- My name is Johnny.
I was born here in this little
town, and I worked for 36 years
now here.
My mom worked for
the old Logan family,
and then I started to work for
the Rawdon family for 36 years.
But that was the normal stuff,
climbing trees and playing
soccer and running around
and follow the ghosts
in the night and lots
of ghosts in this hotel.
It was a hospital during
the Boer War, 1899-1902.
And when you walk
up to the mountain,
you still found the old empty
bullets and [INDISTINCT]
from the British soldiers.
And then from 1904, they
changed it into a hotel.
So when you sit on the
veranda, rooms, here upstairs,
and quiet in the night, at about
one o'clock in the morning,
you can still hear the horses
running and British soldiers
walk, and it sounds
like people talking.
So the soldiers and the
horses are still running,
try to fight the Battle
of Matjiesfontein.
LUCIANO HERDER: My name is
Buri, from Matjiesfontein.
Staff member at the
Lord Merlin hotel.
I've been working here
for almost four years now.
As a little kid,
went here to school,
went to go finish
school in [NON-ENGLISH]..
When I started working
here at the hotel,
that's when my life changed
and everything was always
good to me.
But then I experienced
some things.
And I think that
experience, I want
people to experience themselves,
as I've experienced it.
I've been working
a lot of nights.
So that's when I experience it.
When I'm especially
on nights out there,
when I'm alone in the bar,
here at 9:00 or past nine,
when I'm alone in
the bar, then I
experience a lot of that stuff.
NARRATOR: The town
of Matjiesfontein
was founded in 1884 by the
legendary Scottish railwayman,
James Douglas Logan.
It became established as a
fashionable Victorian health
spa.
The town itself owes its
existence to the Cape
government railways,
the railway line
connecting Cape Town's
port to the diamond
fields of Kimberley.
Matjiesfontein is a feast
for the imagination,
as it has a very
colorful history.
During the Anglo-Boer
war Matjiesfontein
became the headquarters of
the British Cape command
with some 12,000 troops
camped around the village.
The Lord Milner Hotel was built
at the end of the 19th century.
The hotel was named
after Lord Alfred Milner,
who was the governor of the
Cape during the Anglo-Boer war.
During the war, it
was also home to one
of the British-operated
concentration
camps that held mainly
women and children,
since most male prisoners
of war were sent overseas.
Many women and children
perished in these camps.
Over the years, this place
has become a hot spot
for ghost sightings and
other paranormal experiences.
LUCIANO HERDER: I
heard a lot of stories
about Matjiesfontein,
and especially
here at the Lord Milner
Hotel, about ghosts
out walking around there.
And that story that I
didn't want to believe
until I experienced it myself.
[EERIE MUSIC]
Like, I've explained
before, I was in the bar.
The TV was on, but
it wasn't loud.
And it just went
louder and louder.
And I was like,
is there somebody?
I went to go check.
There was nobody.
That was my worst
experience that I had.
When we have functions here,
like weddings, birthday
parties, or anything like that,
then I get a lot of friends
to help out here in the bar.
Two of my friends have told
me they have experience,
they saw a ghost
and all of that.
And I was like, where?
Can you tell me where
did you see them?
He told me, I saw one in the
main building of the hotel,
in a room that is very scary,
that room right in front,
and that is a room 21.
Sometimes you just hear noises.
And that noises that I
hear, it's not good noises,
because it's almost like that
person want to speak to you
but you don't know where
is the voice coming from?
Sometimes I'm just feeling
the door, feeling the door.
But when you go to the
door, there's nobody.
Or when you maybe go
to bed, you go to bed
to go sleep, when you wake
up, then your blanket isn't
on the bed anymore.
It's on the ground.
Then you pick it up.
You go to sleep again.
Then you experience,
when you wake up,
my blanket, again, on the floor.
She won't harm you, but she
used to live in that room.
See?
That's why she always checks
if everything is all right
in the room and all that.
- The last thing,
which I was involved
was with a lady, and a child.
Me and my colleague,
I was writing
our OB book, our security book.
It was at about 25
past 11:00 that night.
And while I was
writing the book,
we heard footsteps
on the red carpet.
And then the colleague
looked into my eyes,
and he said, Jerry,
do you hear that?
I said, yes.
And suddenly, a lady
and this little girl
appeared in the door,
and she asked me,
why is there so big noises?
And I asked them, where?
She said where she was
sleeping, there was noises.
And I said, no, there is
nothing there in the kitchen.
It's only me and the security,
who is now in the hotel.
And then she said, OK.
She turned a bit
and go to the room.
And I said to the
security, Lincoln,
we must have a look
there, because there
is nobody in the hotel.
We go to that room, and we
were standing next to the door.
Then I said to him,
Lincoln, go and fetch
the key, the spare key.
And the key was there.
We opened the door, and there
was nothing in the room.
NARRATOR: What are these
mysterious sounds that can be
heard traveling through time?
Who are these apparitions
that appear to so many people?
Perhaps there are
many souls that
have not found rest wandering
around this place, lost
in time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
- [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
That is now a museum.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
If you pass a building,
and you can feel, oh, there
something has happened
here, because you
can feel there is a warm
wind and then a cold one.
And then you can feel like
there's something cold here
on your arms.
Or maybe, it's sometimes
I sit and smoke,
and all of a sudden,
then I feel, oh,
there's someone next to me.
But I don't worry about it.
I smoke.
I notice someone is next
to me or at the back of me,
but you can't see it.
You can feel it.
You can't see it.
You are not alone now.
- When the time is ready
and the moon come up,
I will take a lady on a tour
into that ghost house, where
you bet I will show
her and tell her
the story what is the reason
that this place standing here.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
- Hello.
My name is Johnny.
- I'm Tess.
Nice to meet you.
- I want to take you, quick,
on a tour onto the Yellow Room.
There's lots of ghosts there.
And later, I want to
show you the museum.
But we can start here
with Lady Milner,
and this is Lord Milner.
OK, we go and show
you the Yellow Room.
TESS: Awesome.
JOHN THEUWISSEN: Follow me.
[EERIE MUSIC]
See?
This was, we call
it, the Yellow Room.
So this chair was
always for Lady Milner,
with her fancy dress, Lord
Milner, children, mistress.
And there's the dinner gong.
See?
The old xylophone, look at it.
See there?
[XYLOPHONE MUSIC]
I want to show
you a ghost photo.
Come and look here.
Doo, doo.
Tonight is the night, lady.
You will feel it.
See, that's the old
grandfather clock, man,
and that's a jewelry box.
Now look here.
They took this photo with
the old Polaroid camera.
Look who's standing there.
Lucy.
- Oh, wow.
- You see that?
- Sure, yeah.
JOHN THEUWISSEN: They sponsored
this camera to the museum.
It's in, I will show you later.
It's a Polaroid.
You can't do Photoshop.
Now this is Lord Milner's wife.
I mean, that's me, no?
- Yeah.
- The big guy is me.
Two little girl, there, see?
And we took another photo.
Look here.
- Oh, no.
- Yeah, that's Kate.
- So Kate was the nurse.
- Yeah.
- OK.
NARRATOR: I will
give you the painting
and you can look better.
See that?
There.
See?
Show with your finger.
You see there.
- Yeah, yeah.
Oh, my gosh.
So you said Kate and
Lucy are two different--
- Different ladies.
- Two different ladies.
Who was Lucy?
- I said Lucy was
Lord Milner's wife.
She was Lady N Milner,
but her nickname was Lucy.
- Lucy, OK.
- Kate was the nurse
in the hospital.
- OK.
- Yeah.
Now follow me this way.
[EERIE MUSIC]
See?
We got the Bible ready.
TESS: Sure, yeah.
JOHN THEUWISSEN: Yes.
OK, let me.
TESS: Yeah, maybe you
should go in front of me.
JOHN THEUWISSEN: OK.
TESS: Ah, that's quite scary.
JOHN THEUWISSEN: If you hear
something like a piano--
the children's room.
TESS: So who is that girl there?
JOHN THEUWISSEN: Yeah, that is
Olive Schreiner in her younger
days.
Do you hear something?
In the middle of the night,
when you come in here, and then
I will put the torch off.
There.
You can put it on now.
You hear that sound?
OK, look here.
Look who's sitting there.
Kate.
Spencer.
Look here.
TESS: Oh, my gosh.
JOHN THEUWISSEN:
You're on a tour now.
Look.
TESS: That's scary.
JOHN THEUWISSEN: Yeah,
but she is a beauty.
TESS: No, she doesn't.
JOHN THEUWISSEN:
Oh, it's a beauty.
[EERIE MUSIC]
Feel something.
There is a light.
I will keep your hand.
OK, go.
TESS: Ooh, this looks
like a dungeon in here.
JOHN THEUWISSEN: Yeah, It was.
With the old guns.
Yeah, very long.
Look.
TESS: Oh, this is beautiful.
Wow.
JOHN THEUWISSEN: [INDISTINCT].
TESS: Sure.
JOHN THEUWISSEN: You bet.
Legend Eugene Terre'Blanche.
I saw someone who--
[SCREAMS]
NARRATOR: Your hair
suddenly stands up
on the back of your neck, and
you can sense someone is there.
You hear a breath,
and adrenaline
rushes through your veins.
Fear is often our
natural reaction
when our senses fail us.
It is hard to control
when it grabs you.
Sometimes entities
appear as apparitions
and sometimes they are sensed.
There are also reports
of entities crossing over
and making physical contact.
Some report a pressure
holding them down.
The fact is that there
are countless reports
of experiences with ghosts
that cannot be denied.
Some entities are friendly
and others are more hostile.
Either way, it is hard to
argue that ghosts in some form
do not exist.
Are we walking this
path alone, or are we
walking alongside our ancestors,
like so many cultures believe?
And who else is here?
[MUSIC PLAYING]